# ChimpanzeePanting
This repository contains data and code for the paper titled: A functional analysis of a potential precursor to human laughter: chimpanzee panting

There is growing interest in the evolution of positive experiences and their expressions. This research has identified morphological homologues of human laughter in other apes, linked to positive emotional experience, predominantly in immature great apes. A functional exploration of human laughter and smiling revealed that these expressions are multi-functional and not exclusively linked to positive internal states. We apply this functional approach to chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes schweinfurthii) affiliative panting to explore whether this expression meets the criteria for three functions of human laughter and smiles: reward, affiliation, and dominance. Panting is defined as the unvoiced but audible rapid inhalation and exhalation of air. We find that panting is produced by individuals of all ages and sexes across social contexts and shares features with two of three suggested functions for human laughter and smiling. When produced in contexts in which interlocutors are likely to experience positive internal states (e.g., grooming, play), chimpanzee panting aligns with the reward function of human laughter/smiles: to extend mutually enjoyable social interaction. Panting was also produced during contexts of social uncertainty (e.g., approaches) in line with the affiliation function: to indicate the signaller’s benign intent thereby reducing the probability of conflict. While our results are preliminary, due to a small dataset, we suggest that chimpanzee panting is a promising candidate behaviour for the exploration of positive signalling and emotion in social species. These expressions likely played a key role in the evolution of large, heterogeneous societies by promoting social cohesion and mediating social conflict.
